# MongoDB

MongoDB is a type of database that is designed to store and manage large volumes of unstructured or semi-structured
data.
Unlike traditional relational databases, which organize data into tables with strict relationships between them, MongoDB
stores data in flexible, JSON-like documents that can have different fields and structures.

In a document database like MongoDB, data is organized into collections, which are analogous to tables in a relational
database. Each document in a collection is a self-contained unit of data, with its own set of fields and values. Because
the documents are stored in a JSON-like format, it is easy to store complex data structures, such as arrays and nested
objects, within a single document.

One of the benefits of using a document database like MongoDB is its flexibility. You can add new fields to documents
or change the structure of the documents themselves without having to modify the underlying database schema. This makes
it easier to adapt to changing business requirements and data models.

Another advantage of MongoDB is its scalability. MongoDB can scale horizontally by distributing data across multiple
servers, which allows it to handle large volumes of data and high levels of traffic.

Overall, MongoDB is a powerful tool for managing large volumes of unstructured data in a flexible, scalable, and
efficient manner.

### Collections instead of tables

In MongoDB, a collection is a grouping of MongoDB documents. It is analogous to a table in a relational database.
A collection exists within a single database and stores documents that have a similar structure, but not necessarily
the same fields.

Collections in MongoDB can be created implicitly or explicitly. When you insert a document into a collection,
MongoDB will create the collection if it doesn't already exist. You can also create a collection explicitly using the
createCollection() method or by using the shell command "db.createCollection()".

Once a collection has been created, you can perform various operations on it, such as inserting documents, updating
documents, deleting documents, and querying for data. Collections in MongoDB are schema-free, meaning that documents
within a collection can have different structures and fields. This makes it easy to work with data that may not have a
fixed schema or that changes frequently.

MongoDB also provides various tools and features for managing collections, such as indexing for faster querying,
aggregation pipelines for data processing, and sharding for horizontal scaling across multiple servers.

Overall, collections are a fundamental component of MongoDB's document-based data model and provide a flexible and
efficient way to store and manage data.

### Documents overview

In MongoDB, a document is a JSON-like data structure that stores data in a flexible, key-value format. It is analogous
to a row in a relational database. Below is an example of a Document in MongoDB:

```JSON
{
  "_id": {
    "$oid": "65522a1c38dba56e80d5cd82"
  },
  "make": "BMW",
  "model": "X5",
  "year": {
    "$numberInt": "1890"
  },
  "price": {
    "$numberInt": "32000"
  },
  "color": "black",
  "createdAt": {
    "$date": {
      "$numberLong": "1679576201083"
    }
  },
  "mechanics": [
    {
      "_id": {
        "$oid": "641c4a617e280fbda629dfc6"
      },
      "name": "Steve",
      "email": "steve@mail.com"

```

- **_id:** The _id field is a unique identifier for the document. It is automatically generated by MongoDB when a
  document is inserted into a collection. If we don't provide an _id field when inserting a document, MongoDB will
  generate one for us.

### Key differences between MongoDB(document database) and relational databases

Relational databases and document databases are two different types of databases, each with their own strengths and
weaknesses. Here are some key differences between them: - **Data structure:** Relational databases store data in tables
with a fixed schema, where each row represents a record
and each column represents a field. Document databases, on the other hand, store data in flexible JSON-like documents,
where each document can have its own unique structure and fields.

- **Querying: ** In a relational database, data is typically accessed using SQL queries, which involve joining tables
  together to retrieve data. In a document database, data is accessed using queries that match documents based on their
  fields and values.
- **Scalability: ** Relational databases scale vertically, meaning that they require increasingly powerful hardware as
  the amount of data grows. Document databases scale horizontally, meaning that they can distribute data across multiple
  servers to handle large amounts of data and traffic.
- **Transactions: ** Relational databases are known for their support of ACID transactions, which ensure that multiple
  database operations are executed atomically and consistently. Document databases generally have weaker support for
  transactions, but some offer more advanced features like multi-document transactions.
- **Schema flexibility: ** Relational databases have a fixed schema, meaning that the structure of the data is defined
  before data is inserted. Document databases are schema-less, meaning that data can be inserted without a pre-defined
  schema, making them more flexible and easier to change.
- **Data normalization: ** In a relational database, data is often normalized to eliminate redundancy and improve
  performance. In a document database, de-normalization is common, where data is duplicated or embedded within a document
  to improve query performance.

Overall, the choice between a relational database and a document database depends on the specific requirements of your
application. If your data has a fixed schema and requires complex queries, a relational database may be the best choice.
If your data is flexible and requires high scalability, a document database may be more suitable.

***

### Querying MongoDB

| Command | Description              |
|---------|--------------------------|
| $ne     | Not equal to             |
| $lt     | Less than                |
| $lte    | Less than or equal to    |
| $gt     | Greater than             |
| $gte    | Greater than or equal to |

Above are just some examples of the operators that can be used in MongoDB. For a full list of operators, see the
MongoDB documentation.